Configure pglogical replication (#3080)
dimagi/commcare-cloud: docs/services/postgresql/split-partitioned-database.md

```bash
commcare-cloud <env> ap setup_pg_logical_replication.yml
```

This will begin the replication process in the background.

# TODO Should add how to check progress and verify. currently i was doing this manually

### 3. Stop all DB requests
Once the databases are fully replicated and you are ready to switch to the new databases, bring the site down.

**Stop all CommCare processes**
```bash
commcare-cloud <env> downtime start
```

**Stop pgbouncer**

```bash
commcare-cloud <env> run-shell-command pg1,pg2,pg3 'monit stop pgbouncer' --become
```

### 4. Update configuration

**Update ansible config**

Update the *dbs* variable in the environment's *postgresql.yml* file
to show that the *p2* database is now on *pg2*:

```diff
...
 dbs:
 ...
   form_processing:
     ...
     partitions:
-      p1:
-        shards: [0, 3]
-        host: pg1
+      p2:
+        shards: [0, 1]
+        host: pg2
+      p3:
+        shards: [2, 3]
+        host: pg3
       ...
```

**Deploy changes**
```
# update localsettings
commcare-cloud <env> update-config

# update PostgreSQL config on new PG node
commcare-cloud <env> ap deploy_db.yml --limit=pg2,pg3

# update the pl_proxy cluster

> commcare-cloud <env> django-manage --tmux configure_pl_proxy_cluster

Author: should add note about  removing the replication

        [
            {
                "application_name": "commcarehq_p3_2_3_sub",
                "replay_location": "2058/4C93E6B0",
                "sent_location": "2058/4C93E6B0"
            }
        ]
    ]
}
```

Synchronize the sequences:

```bash
ANSIBLE_DISPLAY_SKIPPED_HOSTS=False commcare-cloud <env> ap setup_pg_logical_replication.yml --tags=synchronize_sequences --limit=pg1
```

### 4. Update configuration

**Update ansible config**

Update the *dbs* variable in the environment's *postgresql.yml* file
to show that the *p2* database is now on *pg2*:

```diff
...
 dbs:
 ...
   form_processing:
     ...
     partitions:
-      p1:
-        shards: [0, 3]
-        host: pg1
+      p2:
+        shards: [0, 1]
+        host: pg2
+      p3:
+        shards: [2, 3]
+        host: pg3
       ...
```

**Deploy changes**
```
# update localsettings
commcare-cloud <env> update-config

# update PostgreSQL config on new PG node
commcare-cloud <env> ap deploy_db.yml --limit=pg2,pg3

# update the pl_proxy cluster
commcare-cloud <env> django-manage --tmux configure_pl_proxy_cluster
```

To remove the logical replication run the following on all subscriber databases:

```sql

> SELECT pglogical.drop_node(sub_name, true)

Author: should create cleanup ansible playbook for this

Half of the data should be moved to a new *pg2* and *pg3* servers

Current database configuration:

```python
PARTITION_DATABASE_CONFIG = {
    'shards': {
        'p1': [0, 3],
    },
    'groups': {
        'main': ['default'],
        'proxy': ['proxy'],
        'form_processing': ['p1'],
    },
}

DATABASES = {
    'proxy': {
        'ENGINE': 'django.db.backends.postgresql_psycopg2',
        'NAME': 'commcarehq_proxy',
        'USER': 'commcarehq',
        'PASSWORD': 'commcarehq',
        'HOST': 'pg1',
        'PORT': '5432',
        'TEST': {
            'SERIALIZE': False,
        },
    },
    'p1': {
        'ENGINE': 'django.db.backends.postgresql_psycopg2',
        'NAME': 'commcarehq_p1',
        'USER': 'commcarehq',
        'PASSWORD': 'commcarehq',
        'HOST': 'pg1',
        'PORT': '5432',
        'TEST': {
            'SERIALIZE': False,
        },
    },
}
```

At the end of this process shards 0 & 1 should be on *pg2* and shards 2 & 3 will be on *pg3*.

## Important Notes

By default pglogical does not replicate any DDL commands.
This means that any CommCareHQ migrations may not be applied to the target databases while logical replication is active.

> It is recommended to not deploy any changes during the time when splitting the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to not deploy any database schema changes during the time when splitting the database.
```

Author: I intentionally said any changes because its easier to convey that idea and is guaranteed to be safe. Database schema changes are safe if they aren't on the same database that's being replicated. What do you think about keeping the general "no changes allowed" tone versus the harder to define, more technically correct languages?

Reviewer: No, fine to leave as is.

More technical information can be found at https://github.com/2ndQuadrant/pglogical/blob/REL2_x_STABLE/docs/README.md#ddl

## Process Overview

1. Ensure that *pg1* is set to use logical replication
2. Setup *pg2* and *pg3* as a new database
3. Setup logical replication from pg1 to pg2 and pg3
4. Promote *pg2* and *pg3* to a master node
5. Update the applications configuration to go to *pg2* and *pg3*

## Process detail

### 1. Setup logical replication on *pg1*

> In your configuration set the following and deploy the configuration to *pg1*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your inventory file set the following vars for *pg1*:
```

```
[pg1]
...
postgresql_wal_level = logical
postgresql_max_worker_processes = 8
postgresql_shared_preload_libraries = ["pglogical"]
```

Also ensure that your replication user has superuser privileges on all databases, in vault.yml:

```yaml
POSTGRES_USERS:
  replication:
    username: 'foo'
    password: 'bar'
    role_attr_flags: 'LOGIN,REPLICATION,SUPERUSER'
```

In postgresql.yml:

```yaml
postgresql_hba_entries:
  - contype: host
    users: foo
    netmask: 'pg2 ip address'
  - contype: host
    databases: replication
    users: foo

>     netmask: 'pg2 ip address'

Reviewer: do you also need entries for `pg3`?

Author: 9bf7e47665784780938844c3348e31536aafe6c5

```

Then deploy these settings to your databases:

```bash
commcare-cloud <env> ap deploy_db.yml --limit=pg1,pg2,pg3
```

### 2. Setup *pg2* and *pg3*

Setup *pg2* and *pg3* as you would another postgresql database in commcare-cloud.

> In addition to normal setup, add the following your postgresql.yml file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to normal setup, add the following to your `postgresql.yml` file:
```

    - name: commcarehq_p3
      host: pg3
      master_host: pg1
      master_db_name: commcarehq_p1
      replication_set: [2, 3]
```

Deploy this change to your databases using:

```bash
commcare-cloud <env> ap setup_pg_logical_replication.yml
```

This will begin the replication process in the background which replicates one table at a time. To check the progress:

```bash
ANSIBLE_DISPLAY_SKIPPED_HOSTS=False commcare-cloud <env> ap setup_pg_logical_replication.yml --tags=status

TASK [All subscriber status] *****************
ok: [pg2] => {
    "msg": [
        [
            {
                "show_subscription_status": "(sub_name,initializing,provider_name,\"connection_string\",internal_pg_logical_name,{subscription},{all})"
            }
        ]
    ]
}

```

In the above output `initializing` means that the database is copying from the original to the new database.
Once complete it will change to `replicating`

### 3. Stop all DB requests
Once the databases are fully replicated and you are ready to switch to the new databases, bring the site down.

**Stop all CommCare processes**
```bash
commcare-cloud <env> downtime start
```

**Stop pgbouncer**

```bash

> commcare-cloud <env> run-shell-command pg1,pg2,pg3 'monit stop pgbouncer' --become

Reviewer: could this also be:
```suggestion
commcare-cloud <env> service postgresql stop --only pgbouncer --limit pg1,pg2,pg3
```

                "sent_location": "2058/4C93E6B0"
            }
        ]
    ]
}
```

Synchronize the sequences:

```bash
ANSIBLE_DISPLAY_SKIPPED_HOSTS=False commcare-cloud <env> ap setup_pg_logical_replication.yml --tags=synchronize_sequences --limit=pg1
```

### 4. Update configuration

**Update ansible config**

Update the *dbs* variable in the environment's *postgresql.yml* file
to show that the *p2* database is now on *pg2*:

```diff
...
 dbs:
 ...
   form_processing:
     ...
     partitions:
-      p1:
-        shards: [0, 3]
-        host: pg1
+      p2:
+        shards: [0, 1]
+        host: pg2
+      p3:
+        shards: [2, 3]
+        host: pg3
       ...
```

**Deploy changes**
```
# update localsettings
commcare-cloud <env> update-config

# update PostgreSQL config on new PG node
commcare-cloud <env> ap deploy_db.yml --limit=pg2,pg3

# update the pl_proxy cluster
commcare-cloud <env> django-manage --tmux configure_pl_proxy_cluster
```

To remove the logical replication run the following on all subscriber databases:

```sql
SELECT pglogical.drop_node(sub_name, true)
```

### 5. Restart services
**start pgbouncer**

```bash

> commcare-cloud <env> run-shell-command pg1,pg2,pg3 'monit start pgbouncer' --become

Reviewer: I think you only want to start it on the new nodes right?

```suggestion
commcare-cloud <env> service postgresql start --only pgbouncer --limit pg2,pg3
```
